## Types of data analysis

1. **Descriptive** - *Summarise a set of data during early analysis.* **Not** for generalising the results of the analysis to a larger population or trying to make conclusions. Some examples of purely descriptive analysis can be seen in censuses. There is no inferences about what this means or predictions on how the data might trend in the future. It is just to show you a summary of the data collected.

2. **Exploratory** - *Explore the data and find relationships that weren't previously known. Correlates variables.* <font color="red"> Correaltion does not imply causation. </font> All exploratory analysis can tell us is that a relationship exists, not the cause.

3. **Inferential** - *Use a relatively small sample of data to say something about the population at large, i.e. generalisation.*  Accuracy of inference depends heavily on *==sampling scheme==*. Provide uncertainty about estimate in this type of analysis. Example of inferential analysis is [a study](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3521092/) in which a subset of the US population was assayed for their life expectancy given the level of air pollution they experienced. This study uses the data they collected from a sample of the US population to _infer_ how air pollution might be impacting life expectancy in the entire US.

4. **Predictive** - *Use current and historical data to make predictions about future data.* Accuracy depends on measuring the right variables. *More data and a simple model generally performs well at predicting future outcomes.* <font color="red"> Prediction does not imply causation. </font>

5. **Causal** -  *See what happens to one variable when we manipulate another variable.* Considered the gold standard in data analysis. Generally, causal analyses are fairly complicated to do with observed data alone; there will always be questions as to whether it is correlation driving your conclusions or that the assumptions underlying your analysis are valid. More often, causal analyses are applied to the results of randomized studies that were designed to identify causation. **Note:** The data is usually analysed in aggregate and observed relationships are usually average effects. Example, while on average giving a certain population a drug may alleviate the symptoms of a disease, this causal relationship may not hold true for every single affected individual. Randomized controlled trials for drugs.

6. **Mechanistic** - *The goal of mechanistic analysis is to understand the exact changes in variables that lead to exact changes in other variables.* These analyses are exceedingly hard to use to infer much, except in simple situations or in those that are nicely modeled by deterministic equations. Given this description, it might be clear to see how mechanistic analyses are most commonly applied to physical or engineering sciences; biological sciences, for example, are far too noisy of data sets to use mechanistic analysis. Often, when these analyses are applied, the only noise in the data is measurement error, which can be accounted for.
